---
layout: post
title:  "Filesystem 101"
categories: Linux
---

Recently I explored the filesystem design of Linux and found it is little more complicated than I expected, so I decided to write a post organizing it. This post analyzes the filesystem from a high-level view, skipping detailed implementation. I hope that after reading it, you will understand more about the Linux filesystem.

# 1. Overview

## 1.1. file, dentry and inode

First, we start with how the simple syscall `open` works to figure out the filesystem internal.

When you call the `open` system call, `__do_sys_open()` is the entry point in kernel space. In `do_sys_openat2()`, the kernel gets a file descriptor, opens the file, and installs it into process's file table.

```
__do_sys_open(filename, flags, mode)
=> do_sys_open(AT_FDCWD, filename, flags, mode)
  => do_sys_openat2(dfd, filename, &how)
    => fd = get_unused_fd_flags(how->flags)
    => f = do_filp_open(dfd, tmp, &op)
    => fd_install(fd, f)
```

In `path_openat()`, the kernel allocates an empty `file` object, then resolves the pathname, and finally binds the name data (`nd`) to that `file` object by calling `do_open()`.

```
do_filp_open(dfd, pathname, op)
=> set_nameidata(&nd, dfd, pathname, NULL)
=> path_openat(&nd, op, flags | LOOKUP_RCU)
  => file = alloc_empty_file(op->open_flag, current_cred())
  
  // ========= resolution =========
  => s = path_init(nd, flags)
  => link_path_walk(s, nd)
  => s = open_last_lookups(nd, file, op)
  
  => do_open(nd, file, op)
```

The whole process raises three questions:
1. How does the file table work?
2. How does the kernel resolve pathname?
3. How does the binding work?

<br>

The first question, **"how the file table works?"**, is the easiest.

The purpose of the file descriptor is to let a process use a number to represent a `file` object. This implies there is an array-like structure that maintains the mapping between the number and the `file` object, and that is exactly what **file table** does.

When calling `get_unused_fd_flags()`, the kernel gets the file table from the **current process** (`current->files`). It then finds an unused number and marks it as in use.

```
get_unused_fd_flags(flags)
=> __get_unused_fd_flags(flags, rlimit(RLIMIT_NOFILE))
  => alloc_fd(0, nofile, flags)
    => files = current->files
    => fdt = files_fdtable(files)
    => fd = find_next_fd(fdt, fd)
    => __set_open_fd(fd, fdt, flags & O_CLOEXEC)
```

The `fd_install()` is quite simple. It assigns the `file` object to the file table's fd array `fdt->fd[]`, using the pre-reserved `fd` as the index.

```
fd_install(fd, file)
=> files = current->files
=> fdt = files_fdtable(files)
=> rcu_assign_pointer(fdt->fd[fd], file)
```

The next time we call any syscall that requires file operations, we just pass the file descriptor to the kernel. Then `fdget()` or similar functions are used to retrieve the corresponding `file` object.

```
fdget(fd)
=> __fget_light(fd, FMODE_PATH)
  => files = current->files
  => file = files_lookup_fd_raw(files, fd)
    => rcu_dereference_raw(fdt->fd[fd&mask])
  => return BORROWED_FD(file)
```

<br>

The next question is **"how the kernel resolves pathname?"**

There are three steps: setting up resolution environment, resolving the directory and resolving the final file. These steps correspond to three different function calls, which we saw in the `path_openat()`.

The `path_init()` is called first to set up the resolution environment. Basically, it decides the **starting director**y, since the `open` syscall allows a process to resolve a pathname from a specified directory.

If the pathname starts with `"/"`, the kernel sets the starting directory to **root directory**. Otherwise, the kernel checks **directory file descriptor** (`dfd`).

```
path_init(nd, flags)
=> s = nd->pathname
=> if (*s == '/' && ...)
  => nd_jump_root(nd)
    => set_root(nd)
      => fs = current->fs
      => nd->root = fs->root
    => nd->path = nd->root
    => nd->inode = nd->path.dentr->d_inode

=> if (nd->dfd == AT_FDCWD)
  => fs = current->fs
  => nd->path = fs->pwd
  => nd->inode = nd->path.dentry->d_inode

=> else
  => f = fdget_raw(nd->dfd)
  => nd->path = fd_file(f)->f_path
  => nd->inode = nd->path.dentry->d_inode
```

You might already notice the similarity. Although the operations differ, the goal is same: set **`nd->path`** and **`nd->inode`**. Moreover, if you look more carefully, you may notice that `nd->inode` actually comes from a field inside `nd->path`. The `nd->path` is a `path` object consisting of `mnt` and `dentry`.

``` c
struct path {
    struct vfsmount *mnt;
    struct dentry *dentry;
}
```

With `nd->path` set to the starting directory, we move to next step to resolve the **directory part** of the pathname.

Generally, `link_path_walk()` seperates the whole pathname info components **using one or more `"/"` as delimiter** and resolves them one at a time. For example, the pathname `"a/b///c/d"` will be seperated into `"a"`, `"b"`, `"c"` and `"d"`.

Internally, `__d_lookup_rcu()` finds the corresponding **`dentry`** object for the current component based on the current directory (`parent`) and name string (`&nd->last`). Interestingly, all `dentry` objects are stored in bucket lists that can be referenced from a **global** hash table (`dentry_hashtable`).

After successfully obtaining the `dentry` object, `step_into()` is called to **update the current directory to the found `dentry` object**. This function also handles the symlink resolution, but we will not discuss it further here.

The entire process may repeat several times until it reaches the final component.

```
link_path_walk(name, nd)
=> for each components
  => nd->last.name = name
  => link = walk_component(nd, WALK_MORE)
    
    => dentry = lookup_fast(nd)
      => parent = nd->path.dentry
      => dentry = __d_lookup_rcu(parent, &nd->last, &nd->next_seq)
        => b = d_hash(hashlen)
          => dentry_hashtable + hash value
    
    => step_into(nd, flags, dentry)
      => handle_mounts(nd, dentry, &path)
        => path->mnt = nd->path.mnt
        => path->dentry = dentry
      => nd->path = path
      => nd->inode = path.dentry->d_inode
```

Finally, `open_last_lookups()` is called to **resolve the final component** (the file itself). This function is basically the same as `walk_component()` if the file already exists. However, the main difference is that `walk_component()` returns an error if `dentry` doesn't exist, while `open_last_lookups()` **creates a new `dentry` by `__d_alloc()`**.

This kind of `dentry` is called a **negative dentry**, meaning the `dentry` has no associated `inode` (i.e., no actual file on disk), but it still exists in the dcache and can be accessed. It is required because a process is able to pass `O_CREAT` option to create a new file if it doesn't exist.

Later, the kernel calls the inode operations `.create` to create a **`inode`** and bind it to that `dentry`. How the kernel creates the `inode` depends on the filesystem. For instance, the shmem filesystem calls `shmem_get_inode()` to allocate a shmem inode.

```
open_last_lookups(nd, file, op)
=> dentry = lookup_fast_for_open(nd, open_flag)
  => dentry = lookup_fast(nd)
  => return dentry

=> if not found
  => dentry = lookup_open(nd, file, op, got_write)
    => dentry = d_lookup(dir, &nd->last)
    => dentry = d_alloc_parallel(dir, &nd->last, &wq)
      => new = __d_alloc(parent->d_sb, name)
        => dentry = kmem_cache_alloc_lru(dentry_cache)
        => dentry->d_op = sb->__s_d_op
      => return new
    
    => dir_inode->i_op->create(idmap, dir_inode, dentry)
      => inode = ...
      => d_instantiate(dentry, inode)
        => __d_set_inode_and_type(dentry, inode, add_flags)
          => dentry->d_inode = inode

=> step_into(nd, WALK_TRAILING, dentry)
```

By now, we know that the pathname resolution is typically a `dentry` object lookup. It starts by setting the starting directory, seperating pathname into multiple components, and then retrieving the corresponding `dentry` from the hash bucket list.

<br>

The last question, **"How does the binding work?"**, is related to how a file accesses the metadata such as permissions. Internally, `vfs_open()` stores path information for future lookups (`file->__f_path`), and `do_dentry_open()` is called to store the `inode` and invokes filesystem's open handler (`f->f_op->open`). That's how the `file` object is associated with the `dentry` and the `inode`.

```
do_open(nd, file, op)
=> vfs_open(&nd->path, file)
  => file->__f_path = *path
  => do_dentry_open(file, NULL)
    => inode = f->f_path.dentry->d_inode
    => f->f_inode = inode
    => f->f_op = fops_get(inode->i_fop)
    => f->f_op->open(inode, f)
```

In short, the architecture of the relationships among the file desciptor, `file`, `dentry`, `path` and `inode` is as follows:

```
    [fdtable]         (__f_path)
fd --> [0] -> file A ------------> path
                   |                |-- mnt
         (f_inode) |                |-- dentry --
                   |                             |
                    ------> inode <--------------
                                     (d_inode)
       [1] -> file B
       [X] -> ......
```

They each have different roles: a **file descriptor** is a number used to index file table; a **`file`** encapsulates regular files and sockets under the same interfaces for a clean and simple design; a **`path`** is used for lookup, containing mount object (`mnt`) and the `dentry`; a **`dentry`** contains pathname information for file lookup; an **`inode`** contains the file's metadata, including the owner, permissions, and file mapping information.

## 1.2. fs_context, super_block and vfsmount

After introducing the concepts of `inode` and `dentry`, we may wonder **where the `inode` comes from** and **how the mounting operation intializes `mnt` and builds the `inode` tree**. In this section, we will explore these questions and find the answers.

Looking at the syscall `mount`, `do_new_mount()` calls `get_fs_type()` to find the `file_system_type` object with the matching name. The object contains metadata for creating a filesystem instance, and different filesystems may have their own implementations.

`file_system_type` object is later used to initialize a filesystem context (`fc`) object by invoking its `.init_fs_context` handler. A filesystem context represents an **in-progress mount operation** and stores configuration before the superblock is created. The `.init_fs_context` handler typically allocates and initializes **filesystem-specific private data** and sets up the **context operations (`fc->ops`)**.

After that, `parse_monolithic_mount_data()` is called to **parse the mount parameters**. For example, if you run the `mount` command with the options `-o ro,noexec`, the string `"ro,noexec"` will be parsed and used to update the filesystem context.

Finally, `do_new_mount_fc()` is called to set up the superblock and mount point.

```
__do_sys_mount(dev_name, dir_name, type, flags, data)
=> do_mount(kernel_dev, dir_name, kernel_type, flags, options)
  => user_path_at(AT_FDCWD, dir_name, LOOKUP_FOLLOW, &path)
  => path_mount(dev_name, &path, type_page, flags, data_page)
    => do_new_mount(path, type_page, sb_flags, mnt_flags, dev_name, data_page)
      => type = get_fs_type(fstype)
        => fs = __get_fs_type(name, len)
        => return fs
      
      => fc = fs_context_for_mount(type, sb_flags)
        => alloc_fs_context(fs_type, NULL, sb_flags, 0, FS_CONTEXT_FOR_MOUNT)
          => fc = kzalloc(sizeof(struct fs_context))
          => fc->fs_type->init_fs_context(fc)

      => parse_monolithic_mount_data(fc, data)
        => if (fc->ops->parse_monolithic != NULL)
          => fc->ops->parse_monolithic(fc, data)
        => else
          => generic_parse_monolithic(fc, data)
      
      => do_new_mount_fc(fc, path, mnt_flags)
```

Internally, the kernel calls filesystem's `.get_tree` handler to build the **file tree**. For filesystems that **require a backing image**, such as ext4, the handler initializes the superblock and sets up the root `inode` and root `dentry` based on on-disk metadata. Other `inode`s and `dentry`s are **loaded on demand** during path lookup rather than being created eagerly at mount time.

In contrast, for filesystems that **do not require a backing image**, such as ramfs, the handler typically allocates a new superblock and creates only the root `inode` and `dentry` for the mount point.

```
do_new_mount_fc(fc, mountpoint, mnt_flags)
=> mnt = fc_mount(fc)
  => vfs_get_tree(fc)
    => fc->ops->get_tree(fc)
  => vfs_create_mount(fc)
```
Let's take ramfs as an example. Its `.init_fs_context` sets the context operations to `&ramfs_context_ops`, whose `.get_tree` handler is `ramfs_get_tree()`.

``` c
int ramfs_init_fs_context(struct fs_context *fc)
{
    // [...]
    fc->ops = &ramfs_context_ops;
    return 0;
}

static const struct fs_context_operations ramfs_context_ops = {
    .free        = ramfs_free_fc,
    .parse_param = ramfs_parse_param,
    .get_tree    = ramfs_get_tree,
};
```

Almost all filesystems follow a pattern for their `.get_tree` handler. They commonly call `get_tree_nodev()` or related functions, passing a filesystem-specific `fill_super` callback.

`get_tree_nodev()` internally obtains or creates a superblock and then invokes the provided callback to intialize it. In the case of ramfs, its `.get_tree` handler calls `get_tree_nodev()` with `ramfs_fill_super()`.

``` c
static int ramfs_get_tree(struct fs_context *fc)
{
    return get_tree_nodev(fc, ramfs_fill_super);
}
```

If a new superblock is needed, `alloc_super()` is called to allocate a `super_block` object, and the newly created `super_block` object is then inserted into the `file_system_type`'s superblock linked list (`s->s_type->fs_supers`) by `sget_fc()`. After that, the `fill_super` callback (in this case, `ramfs_fill_super()`) is invoked to initialize that `super_block` object.

```
get_tree_nodev(fc, ramfs_fill_super)
=> vfs_get_super(fc, NULL, fill_super)
  => sb = sget_fc(fc, test, set_anon_super_fc)
    => s = alloc_super(fc->fs_type, fc->sb_flags, user_ns)
    => hlist_add_head(&s->s_instances, &s->s_type->fs_supers)
  
  => fill_super(sb, fc)

=> fc->root = dget(sb->s_root)
```

The `fill_super` callback must initialize the root `inode` and the root `dentry`, since the root `inode` contains the **inode operations (`i_op`)** and **file operations (`i_fop`)** required for directory lookup and file access.

In `ramfs_fill_super()`, `ramfs_get_inode()` is called to allocate and initialize the root `inode`. Then `d_make_root()` creates a `dentry` associated with that `inode`, and the returned `dentry` is assigned to the superblock's root (`sb->s_root`).

```
fill_super(sb, fc)   # ramfs_fill_super
=> sb->s_op = &ramfs_ops
=> inode = ramfs_get_inode(sb, NULL, S_IFDIR | ..., 0)
  => inode = new_inode(sb)
    => alloc_inode(sb)
      => if sb->s_op->alloc_inode != NULL
        => inode = sb->s_op->alloc_inode(sb)
      => else
        => inode = alloc_inode_sb(sb)
  
  => if (mode == S_IFDIR)
    => inode->i_op = &ramfs_dir_inode_operations
    => inode->i_fop = &simple_dir_operations

=> sb->s_root = d_make_root(inode)
```

At the end of the mounting process, `vfs_create_mount()` creates a `mount` object and associate it with the superblock by setting `m->mnt.mnt_sb` to point to the superblock (`root->d_sb`).

```
vfs_create_mount(fc)
=> mnt = alloc_vfsmnt(fc->source)
  => mnt = kmem_cache_zalloc(mnt_cache)

=> setup_mnt(mnt, fc->root)
  => m->mnt.mnt_sb = root->d_sb
  => m->mnt.mnt_root = dget(root)
  => mnt_add_instance(m, s)
    => s->s_mounts = m

=> return &mnt->mnt
```

Since the filesystem context (`fs_context`) is only used during the mount setup phrase, it is **released** before returning to userspace and is not referenced by any persistent VFS object.

<br>

In summary, the filesystem name is used to look up the corresponding **`file_system_type`**, and its `.init_fs_context` handler is invoked to initialize a **filesystem context** (`fs_context`). Later, the kernel calls the filesystem's `.get_tree` handler to to build a file tree. Internally, a **`super_block`** object and a **`mount`** object are created, and the **root `inode`** and the **root `dentry`** are intialized by the filesystem's `fill_super` callback.

```
             [lookup]
name ("ramfs") ---> file_system_type list ("bdev" <--> "aio" <--> "anon_inodefs" ...)
                          |
                          | [found]
                          v
                     ramfs_fs_type (.name == "ramfs")
                          |
                          | (fs_supers)
           (s_root)       |
dentry   <---------  super_block --> super_block --> super_block --> ...
|        <--              |
|           |             | (s_mounts)
|(d_inode)  |             |
|            ---------  mount --> mount --> mount --> ...
|          (mnt_root)           
v
inode
```

Awesome! Now we understand how a simple file descriptor can reference the actual file content and interact with the filesystem.

You may wonder why mount points and superblocks do not have a one-to-one relationship in the diagram. This is because when the mount flags include `MS_BIND`, the kernel invokes `__do_loopback()` instead of `do_new_mount()`. In this case, the process requests a new mount point based on an existing one. As a result, the kernel allocates a new `mount` object for the target path, but it **shares the same underlying superblock as the original mount**.

```
path_mount(dev_name, path, type_page, flags, data_page)
=> do_loopback(path, dev_name, flags & MS_REC)
  => kern_path(old_name, LOOKUP_FOLLOW|LOOKUP_AUTOMOUNT, &old_path)
  => __do_loopback(&old_path, recurse)
    => clone_mnt(old, old_path->dentry, 0)
      => mnt = alloc_vfsmnt(old->mnt_devname)
      => setup_mnt(mnt, root)   <-----   attach to existing superblock
```

# 2. Past Vulnerabilites

Here I chose two vulnerabilities that were exploited in kernelCTF in recent years to illustrate security issues in the filesystem.

## 2.1. CVE-2022-0185: vfs: fs_context: fix up param length parsing in legacy_parse_param
> https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=722d94847de29310e8aa03fcbdb41fc92c521756

This is an integer underflow vulnerability in `legacy_parse_param()`, a function used to parse mount parameter for legacy filesystems. The vulnerability leads to a length check bypass, which is ultimately turned into a heap overflow.

``` diff
@@ -548,7 +548,7 @@ static int legacy_parse_param(struct fs_context *fc, struct fs_parameter *param)
                   param->key);
     }
 
-   if (len > PAGE_SIZE - 2 - size)
+   if (size + len + 2 > PAGE_SIZE)
        return invalf(fc, "VFS: Legacy: Cumulative options too large");
    if (strchr(param->key, ',') ||
        (param->type == fs_value_is_string &&
```

We've mentioned that the mount parameters are parsed by `parse_monolithic_mount_data()`. In fact, to support more flexible configuration, Linux later introduced three new syscalls: **`fsopen`, `fsconfig` and `fsmount`**. They roughly correspond to the main steps of mounting: creating a filesystem context (selecting the filesystem type), configuring mount options, and finally creating a mount object.

By calling the `fsconfig` syscall, we can set the key and value to a malformed parameter, causing the kernel to invoke the filesystem context's `.parse_param` handler, which eventually reaches the vulnerable function `legacy_parse_param()`.

```
__do_sys_fsconfig(fd, cmd, key, value, aux)
=> vfs_fsconfig_locked(fc, cmd, &param)
  => vfs_parse_fs_param(fc, param)
    => fc->ops->parse_param(fc, param)
       (legacy_fs_context_ops.parse_param == legacy_parse_param)
```

But what kind of filesystem sets `&legacy_fs_context_ops` as its filesystem context operations?

We just need to find a filesystem that **does not implement `.init_fs_context` handler**. In that case, `alloc_fs_context()` will fall back to use the legacy initialization path.

```
alloc_fs_context()
=> if (fc->fs_type->init_fs_context == NULL)
  => legacy_init_fs_context(fc)
    => fc->ops = &legacy_fs_context_ops
```

## 2.2. CVE-2023-5345: fs/smb/client: Reset password pointer to NULL
> https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=e6e43b8aa7cd3c3af686caf0c2e11819a886d705

When configuring an SMB filesystem, `smb3_fs_context_parse_param()` is called to parse user-provided parameters. However, it forgets to reset `ctx->password` to `NULL` after freeing it. As a result, a user can trigger multiple frees on the same pointer.

``` diff
@@ -1541,6 +1541,7 @@ static int smb3_fs_context_parse_param(struct fs_context *fc,
 
  cifs_parse_mount_err:
    kfree_sensitive(ctx->password);
+   ctx->password = NULL;
    return -EINVAL;
 }
```

This function can be reached in the same way as in CVE-2022-0185.

# 3. Summary

This post just provides a simple overview of the Linux filesystem. The root causes of the two vulnerabilities are relatively straighforward and can be understood by most Linux kernel researchers. Obviously, I think finding them may not be too difficult for AI nowadays 😆.

But what happens when filesystems interact with **namespaces** or other features, or when **multiple filesystems** are layered or combined? Could unexpected issues arise?

I may write a follow-up post to explore the interaction between the filesystem and other subsystems. It is a complex but interesting topic!
